---
title: "RGBDS - Rednex Game Boy Development System"
slug: "2018-02-05-rgbds"
publishDate: "2018-02-05T23:42:00"
Lastmod: "2026-01-14T01:30:00"
authors:
- name: "Antonio Niño Díaz"
tags: ["programming", "gameboy"]
---

[RGBDS](https://github.com/gbdev/rgbds) is a toolchain to develop in assembly
for the Game Boy. It is used by many projects nowadays, and I'm not talking
about small ones:

- Disassemblies of games released during the lifetime of the GB:

  - https://github.com/pret/pokered
  - https://github.com/pret/pokecrystal
  - https://github.com/pret/pokepinball

- Completely new projects:

  - https://github.com/ISSOtm/Aevilia-GB

- Of course, it's the toolchain I use for my own projects:

  - https://codeberg.org/SkyLyrac/ucity
  - https://codeberg.org/SkyLyrac/back-to-color
  - https://codeberg.org/SkyLyrac/geometrix

The only real alternative is [WLA DX](https://github.com/vhelin/wla-dx), as
far as I know. I personally don't like the syntax (because of small things like
using parentheses instead of square brackets for indirection) but it is probably
as powerful as RGBDS, and it's worth taking a look at it if you want to do
something serious for the GB.

## History

It was released in 1997 as ASMotor by Carsten Sørensen as a general-purpose
assembler for DOS/Win32. In 1999, it was modified by Justin Lloyd and released
as RGBDS. In 2009, Vegard Nossum adapted the code for the toolchain to be more
UNIX-like and released it as rgbds-linux. In 2010, Anthony J. Bentley forked the
repository and improved on it, becoming the reference implementation of RGBDS.
Then, in February 2017, he asked me if I wanted to be its new maintainer, I
accepted, and he moved the repository to a neutral username. Basically, I was
one of the few people still proposing new changes and fixes, so it was a safe
choice.

Nowadays, this project is located here: https://github.com/gbdev/rgbds

It is important to know that during all this time (20 years!) many people have
contributed to it, not only the main maintainers mentioned above. This had left
the codebase in a really complicated licensing situation. The original code was
released without a license, and pretty much every new contributor used a
variation of the BSD or MIT license for new changes.

This is why I tried (and succeeded!) to get all the main authors to agree to
change the license so that all the codebase would have the same one. In the end,
all of the main contributors answered and gave permission to relicense their
code, and the MIT license was chosen: https://github.com/rednex/rgbds/pull/225

In any case, because of its story, I don't think it makes sense to consider this
the project of a specific person in particular. At some point it just becomes a
project of the community.

## How it works

RGBDS is divided into **rgbasm**, **rgblink**, **rgbfix** and **rgbgfx**. In the
past, there was another tool called rgblib, but it was quite pointless as nobody
really used it, and the object format breaks quite often when adding new
features to the toolchain.

- **rgbasm**: Assembler.

  It takes a file with source code as input and generates an object file as
  output. It uses yacc/bison to parse files, which is a bit problematic because
  of the source code syntax and how hard it is to resolve conflicts.

  It is really flexible. It has support for macros, unions, even for referencing
  local labels through the parent label. Of course, the address of labels is not
  always known at compile time, it is only known if the value is directly
  assigned, or if the base address of the section is directly assigned. In order
  to be able to resolve their address at linking time, or even be able to
  calculate simple expressions with them (addition, bit masks...) there is a RPN
  language that is used in object files to tell the linker how to operate with
  them. Each value that has to be modified by the linker generates a patch of
  RPN instructions.

- **rgblink**: Linker.

  It reads all object files generated by rgbasm (and potentially a linkerscript
  with information about where to place sections) and generates a raw GB ROM,
  that is not generally ready to directly use in a GB.

  In short, it places all sections in their final locations and calculates the
  final value of all RPN patches. It can also generate files with a list of
  labels and addresses to help debugging.

- **rgbfix**: ROM fixer.

  Used to fix a finished GB ROM. There are some fields in the header that must
  have the correct value for the game to boot in a real GB. Some of this fields
  are difficult to fill at linking time, so it's easier to have an external tool
  for it, that's where rgbfix comes in handy. It also pads a ROM if the size
  isn't a power of two.

- **rgbgfx**: Graphics converter.

  This tool converts png files into the format that the GB uses. I must admit
  that I've never used this tool, but it is used in disassemblies extensively.

## Conclusion

I find it really interesting that this toolchain has managed to survive for such
a long time, and that it is still used so much. It's mostly used by
disassemblers, I must admit, but hey!

As I've said before, this project wouldn't be nearly as useful if it wasn't
thanks to all of its contributors. Because of it, it is always open to
contributions. They don't have to be big or fancy, even small bug reports (or
bug fixes!) are welcome. So yeah, let's keep this project alive!

**Update (2026-01-14)**

Updated links from GitHub to Codeberg.
